Doliornis sclateriUncommon cotinga found only in very high-elevation forest near treeline in the eastern Andes of central Peru. Adult plumage is gray with a tan breast and belly and a chestnut vent. Male has a black cap and a red crest that is usually hidden. Female lacks the crest and has only a little black on the crown. Juvenile is mostly brown but has the chestnut vent. Often perches up on an exposed branch. Typical call is a short, metallic rasp given at long intervals.Identification & Behavior:Â ~22 cm (8.6 in). The male Bay-vented Cotinga has gray upperparts, throat, neck, breast, and a black cap. The rest of the underparts are brown with chestnut vent and undertail coverts. The female is similar but has a gray cap. Both sexes have a semi-concealed rufous nape. It forages in humid elfin forests and humid scrub. It is similar to the Red-crested Cotinga but is distinguished by having a brown belly, a black cap (male) and chestnutÂ vent and undertail feathers. Its range does not overlap with the closely related Chestnut-bellied Cotinga.Status: Endemic. The Bay-vented Cotinga is generally rare and local in montane elfin forests of the east slope of the Andes at elevations ranging between 2600-2800 m.Name in Spanish: Cotinga de Subcaudales Bayas.Sub-species: Bay-vented Cotinga (Doliornis sclateri), Taczanowski, 1874.Meaning of Name: Doliornis: Gr. dolios, dolos= cunning, crafty, wily and ornis, ornithos= bird.sclateri: In honor of Dr. Philip Lutley Sclater (1829-1913) English ornithologist, collector.See more ofÂ the Family CotingidaeÂ  ÂJustification for Red List categoryThis species qualifies as Near Threatened because it has a very small population, which is suspected to decline as a result of continuing degradation and loss of its habitat.Range descriptionDoliornis sclateri occurs on the east slope of the Andes in north and central Peru, with records from San Martín, Huánuco, Pasco and Junín. Its known distribution is localised, though it may be overlooked and also occur in suitable intervening areas.Population informationThe species is described as very rare and local (G. Engblom in litt. 2003, Schulenberg et al. 2007). It may however be difficult to detect, as Doliornis cotingas have soft, easily overheard calls and tend to be relatively inactive. A survey in Carpish (Huánuco) found a density of 0.3 individuals/km2 (Rivas Mogollón 2019). Assuming that this density is representative for the entire range, the global population may number 3,570 individuals. This roughly equates to 2,380 mature individuals.Trend justificationThe population trend has not been assessed, but the species is suspected to be in decline due to the loss and degradation of elfin forests and páramo habitat through burning and overgrazing.Habitat and ecologyIt inhabits the páramo/cloud-forest ecotone at 2,600-3,800 m, preferring low trees with dense canopy (Schulenberg et al. 2007, Schulenberg and Kirwan 2020). It seems to favour complex treeline habitat, which is getting increasingly rare and is now found mostly in small, fragmented patches. It is mainly frugivorous, but also takes invertebrates (Snow 1982, Schulenberg and Kirwan 2020). Otherwise, its ecology remains largely unknown.Threats impacting the speciesThe páramo/cloud-forest ecotone habitat favoured by this species is being reduced and degraded owing to the use of fire to maintain pastureland and overgrazing by livestock (SERFOR 2018, Schulenberg and Kirwan 2020).Conservation actions underway and neededConservation Actions UnderwayIt occurs in Río Abiseo National Park.Conservation Actions ProposedConduct surveys to locate additional populations and clarify the distribution range. Census the population and quantify the population trend. Research the species' ecology. Quantify the impact of threats on the population size. Monitor the population trend. Monitor rates of habitat loss. Protect areas of suitable habitat within the range. Prevent overgrazing and regulate the use of fire. Raise awareness for the species and its habitat.The bay-vented cotinga (Doliornis sclateri) is a species of bird in the family Cotingidae. It is endemic to Peru.Its natural habitats are subtropical or tropical moist montane forests and subtropical or tropical high-altitude grassland. It is threatened by habitat loss.IdentificationMales have a black crown and nape (with partially concealed red crests), and are dark brown above and paler brown below, with reddish brown tail-coverts and grey throat and sides of head and neck. Female are similar, but lack black crown.[2]